# Fermentation-bacteria

The scripts used as part of this project are here described in order:

## initialiser.py
**Local**: *Used after downloading whole-genomes sequences from NCBI.*

- Sets up the working directory.
- Fills a **Pandas** dataframe with information on the genomes using the "data_summary.tsv" file present in the folder downloaded from **NCBI**.
- The dataframe is filled with informations such as the organism qualifier, taxonomic ID, assembly name/accession, size, gene count, BioProject ID, BioSample ID, etc.
- Removes unnecessary files.
- Moves all the genome sequences to the bacterium-specific folder (removes unnecessary nested folders).
- Saves the full bacteria log data as an **Excel** sheet --> "bacteria_log.xlsx"


## [CheckM](https://github.com/Ecogenomics/CheckM)
**Mjolnir**: *Used after exporting the whole-genome sequence files.*

~~~
#!/bin/sh
#SBATCH -c 8 --mem 40G --output=Acetic.xmfa --time 14-0:00
module load checkm-genome/1.1.3
p=/projects/mjolnir1/people/vhp327/new/
cd $p
mkdir output
for i in $(ls $p)
do if [ -d $i ]
    then
        checkm lineage_wf -x fna $i ${i}_output
        cd ${i}_output
        checkm qa lineage.ms ./ -f qa_${i}.txt
        mv qa_${i}.txt ../output
        cd $p
    fi
done
~~~

**What does CheckM do?**
- Assesses the quality of microbial genomes recovered from isolates, single cells, and metagenomes.
- Uses **Prodigal** to identify genes in a given sequence.
- Places genome bins into a reference genome tree and relies on that phylogenetic placement to identify sets of genes that should be in the genome.
- Looks for those genes using **Hmmer** to search the genome. 
- The completeness is an estimate of the fraction of genes that are expected to be there which were actually found. 
- The contamination is based on identifying the number of single-copy genes, that should only be there once.
- Returns quality assessment files include the percentage of completeness and the degree of contamination for each given genome.
- The output files are saved in a directory named "output".


## qa_filtering.py
**Local**: *Used after importing the "output" directory locally.*

- Reads the quality assessment output files generated by **CheckM**.
- Converts all the qa data into a **Pandas** dataframe that is then converted into an **Excel** sheet --> "total_qa_df.xlsx".

- Reads the "total_qa_df.xlsx" sheet.
- Based on the completeness and the percentage of contamination of each genome, given the predetermined threshold parameters (completeness threshold = 0.9; contamination threshold = 0.05), filters out genomes that are not fit for the analysis. 
- This is done by creating a new directory called "Genomes_filtered" where only the valid whole-genome sequences are present.


## acetic_or_lactic.py
**Mjolnir**: *Used after exporting the "Genomes_filtered" directory to the Mjolnir server.*

- Writes a file ("sort_file.txt") that lists all the genomes and indicates whether each genome is part of the Lactic or the Acetic bacteria family.

- Reads the "sort_file.txt" file that assigns every genome to either the Lactic or the Acetic bacteria family.
- Correspondingly moves the genome sequence files in the "Acetic" folder or the "Lactic" folder. 
- That way, lactic and acetic bacteria can be treated separately for later steps of the analysis.


## first_tree.py
**Local**: *Used after separating the acetic bacteria from the lactic bacteria and filtering out contaminated and incomplete genomes.*

- Retrieves the percentage of completeness of all genomes from the "bacteria log v2.xlsx" Excel sheet (the updated version of "bacteria_log.xlsx").
- For each species of interest (acetic or lactic), finds the file corresponding to the most complete genome of that species.
- Creates a new directory ("Acetic_unique"/"Lactic_unique") containing only the most complete genome per species.

This directory is then exported to the server so that **Prokka** can be used to annotate all the selected genomes.


## [Prokka](https://github.com/tseemann/prokka)
**Mjolnir**: *Used after exporting the "Acetic_unique"/"Lactic_unique" directory (containing only the most complete genomes) to the server.*

~~~
#!/bin/sh
#SBATCH -c 8 --mem 40G --output=Acetic.xmfa --time 14-0:0
module load prokka/1.14
p=/projects/mjolnir1/people/vhp327/Acetic_unique
cd $p
mkdir Acetic_unique_annotated
for file in *.fna; do tag=${file%.fna}; prokka --prefix "$tag" --outdir Acetic_unique_annotated/"$tag"_prokka "$file"; done
~~~

**What is Prokka?**
- Command line software tool that can be installed on any Unix system. Prokka coordinates a suite of existing software tools to achieve a rich and reliable annotation of genomic bacterial sequences.
- Prokka expects preassembled genomic DNA sequences in FASTA format. Finished sequences without gaps are the ideal input, but it is expected that the typical input will be a set of scaffold sequences produced by de novo assembly software.
- The tools used are: **Prodigal** (Hyatt 2010) to identify coding sequence (CDS), **RNAmmer** (Lagesen et al., 2007) to identify ribosomal RNA genes (rRNA), **Aragorn** (Laslett and Canback, 2004) to identify transfer RNA genes, **SignalP** (Petersen et al., 2011) to identify signal leader peptides and **Infernal** (Kolbe and Eddy, 2011) for non-coding RNA.
- The traditional way to predict what a gene codes for is to compare it with a large database of known sequences, usually at a protein sequence level, and transfer the annotation of the best significant match.
- Prokka uses this method, but in a hierarchical manner, starting with a smaller trustworthy database, moving to medium-sized but domain-specific databases, and finally to curated models of protein families.
- Prokka produces 10 files in the specified output directory, all with a common prefix. The GFF v3 file (.gff) containing sequences and annotations is the one that will be used later in the pipeline.


## [Roary](https://sanger-pathogens.github.io/Roary/)
**Mjolnir**: *Used after annotating the genomes located in the "Acetic_unique"/"Lactic_unique" directory with Prokka.*

Once the genomes have been annotated, they can be aligned using **Roary**.

~~~
#!/bin/sh
#SBATCH -c 8 --mem 40G --output=Acetic.xmfa --time 14-0:00
module load roary/3.13.0
p=/projects/mjolnir1/people/vhp327/Acetic_unique
cd $p/Acetic_unique_annotated
mkdir ../Acetic_unique_roary
for dir in $(ls $p)
do
  cp $dir/*.gff ../../Acetic_unique_roary
done
cd $p/Acetic_unique_roary
roary –e –mafft *.gff
~~~

**What does Roary do?**
- From the ".gff" files given by **Prokka**, converts coding sequences into protein sequences.
- Cluster these protein sequences by several methods.
- Further refines clusters into orthologous genes.
- For each sample, determines if gene is present/absent: produces "gene_presence_absence.csv".
- Uses this gene p/a information to build a tree, using **FastTree**: produces "accessory_binary_genes.fa.newick".
- Overall, calculates number of genes that are shared, and unique: produces "summary_statistics.txt".
- Aligns the core genes using **Mafft** (if option used, as above) for downstream analyses: produces "core_gene_alignment.aln".


## [FastTree](http://www.microbesonline.org/fasttree/)
**Mjolnir**: *Used after constructing the pan-genome alignment with Roary.*

Once the genomes have been aligned, we can construct the tree using **FastTree**.

~~~
#!/bin/sh
#SBATCH -c 8 --mem 40G --output=Acetic.xmfa --time 14-0:00
module load roary/3.13.0
FastTree -nt -gtr output_with_alignment/core_gene_alignment.aln \
    > tree.newick
~~~

**What does FastTree do?**
- Infers approximately-maximum-likelihood phylogenetic trees from alignments of nucleotide or protein sequence.
- Generates the tree file in **Newick format** ("tree.newick") based on the core alignment file ("core_gene_alignment.aln").
- Faster than **PhyML 3.0** and **RAxML 7** for large alignments.
- (-gtr) --> generalized time-reversible model.


## Visualisation
### With Phandango
- Go to http://phandango.net
- Drag and drop the "tree.newick" and "gene_presence_absence.csv" files onto the landing page.
- View the tree of samples and their core and pan genomes

### With Roary plots
~~~
python3 roary_plots.py tree.newick gene_presence_absence.csv
~~~
